fix typo (#180)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/polkadot/learn/comparisons/cosmos.md

Some of the parachains on Polkadot will act as interpreters to external chains such as Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Cosmos. These are called parachain bridges.

### Cosmos

There is not a center in the Cosmos universe, where in true decentralized fashion each chain is independent and maintains their own validator set. However, the _hubs_ such as the Cosmos Hub or the [Iris Hub](https://www.irisnet.org) provide a juncture for which the chains can communicate.

Cosmos does not attempt to create an environment of shared security among the chains connected by the bridge _zones_ and hubs. Instead they take a sovereign-first approach and strictly require chains to maintain their own validator set and economic security.

> Cosmos connects to external chains through the use of what are called _peg zones_ which provide a kind of specialized bridge that can understand the external consensus. For all chains that run the "fast finality" algorithm, Tendermint, their interoperability protocol (known as IBC, more on that below) should work without the need of this special peg.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cosmos connects to external chains through the use of what are called _peg zones_ which provide a kind of specialized bridge that can understand the external consensus. For all chains that satisfy [consensus requirements](https://github.com/cosmos/ics/tree/master/spec/ics-002-consensus-verification), their interoperability protocol (known as IBC, more on that below) will work without the need of this special peg.
```

> The Cosmos hub uses a Proof-of-Stake algorithm that weighs validators by the amount of tokens backing them. It also allows smaller holders to delegate their tokens to one of its 100 validators. However, other zones in Cosmos may implement variants of this Proof-of-Stake scheme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cosmos hub uses a Proof-of-Stake algorithm that weighs validators by the amount of tokens backing them. It also allows smaller holders to delegate their tokens to one of its validators (currently 100, but there are plans to increase this number to >300). However, other zones in Cosmos may implement variants of this Proof-of-Stake scheme.
```

## Trust model

Polkadot and Cosmos enforce the notion of honest behavior of their validator set through slashing punishments in which some of the validators' stakes could get depleted if they are found doing something bad.

Polkadot depends on the complete validator set in cases where the subset of validators are unable to make a new state transition for a parachain. At all times, there is the possibility to tap into the entire security of all of Polkadot. This is because Polkadot has the notion of shared state, in which all the pieces fit together into one unanimous multichain. So in this way, if one parachain is tainted the entire state of Polkadot is able to revert the tainted operations and slash the unscrupulous validators.

The entire validator set must resolve a conflict if it so happens that the supermajority of the validators which are assigned to a parachain shard become dishonest (or Byzantine, a word to refer nodes which have failed in some fashion-- whether this means they have gone offline or become malicious).

> Cosmos does not operate under the assumption that all the connected chains have shared state, so in this way each chain is independent and responsible for incentivizing their own security. The Cosmos IBC design does not make additional security guarantees on any of the interchain messaging. If a user decided to send a message from one Cosmos Tendermint chain to another, and later that second chain is corrupted because it had much lower security, it could have an indirect effect on the original chain. Cosmos' model is only as secure as the least secure of the bridged chains that the user uses. It is expected that the security will vary widely between each chain on Cosmos and users of the chains should know and understand this. This is different from Polkadot which is designed to distribute security as a blanket over all parachains through the shared-state model.

Reviewer: We do have plans to allow hub validators to also validate other chains. Something we are calling interchain collateralization. cc @cwgoes for more info here.

> Cosmos does not operate under the assumption that all the connected chains have shared state, so in this way each chain is independent and responsible for incentivizing their own security. The Cosmos IBC design does not make additionally security guarantees on of any of the interchain messaging. If a user decided to send a message from one Cosmos Tendermint chain to another, and later that second chain is corrupted because it had much lower security, it could have an indirect effect on the original chain. Cosmos' model is only as secure as the least secure of the bridged chains that the user uses. It is expected that the security will vary widely between each chain on Cosmos and users of the chains should know and understand this. This is different from Polkadot which is designed to distribute security as a blanket over all parachains through the shared-state model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Cosmos does not operate under the assumption that all the connected chains have shared state, so in this way each chain is independent and responsible for incentivizing their own security. The Cosmos IBC design does not make additional security guarantees on any of the interchain messaging. If a user decided to send a message from one Cosmos Tendermint chain to another, and later that second chain is corrupted because it had much lower security, it could have an indirect effect on the original chain. Cosmos' model is only as secure as the least secure of the bridged chains that the user uses. It is expected that the security will vary widely between each chain on Cosmos and users of the chains should know and understand this. This is different from Polkadot which is designed to distribute security as a blanket over all parachains through the shared-state model.
```

## Interoperability 

> Polkadot and Cosmos both claim blockchain interoperability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Polkadot and Cosmos are both working on blockchain interoperability protocols.
```

Polkadot uses the Interchain Message Passing (ICMP) protocol to send messages between parachains. The messages which are passed can be any arbitrary string of bytes, meaning they could be encoded to be asset transfers or more complex cross-chain calls. ICMP is trustless because it is verified by the validator as part of the validity check of each new parachain block that the messages will be included. Validators only accept new parachain blocks if they've included all of the incoming messages from other parachains (given a one or two blocks buffer). Additionally, the Shared Protected Runtime Execution Environment (SPREE) gives even stronger guarantees that the messages will trigger the same exact code across parachains.

Cosmos's work in this regard is currently focused on Inter-Blockchain Communication (IBC). IBC resembles TCP in the legacy world of networking because it treats each blockchain as its own separate process with its own security assumptions. 

> Both ICMP and IBC require consensus verification, but ICMP provides state machine verification while IBC leaves this up to aspect up to the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both ICMP and IBC require consensus verification, but ICMP provides state machine verification while IBC leaves this aspect up to the user.
```

> Protip: For more on SPREE see [here](https://wiki.polkadot.network/en/latest/polkadot/learn/spree/).

### Connecting Polkadot and Cosmos

The astute reader will notice that the two interoperability protocols used respectively by Polkadot and Cosmos have different formats and try to achieve different goals. While Polkadot wants to enable trustless data transmission among the parachains, Cosmos wants to be able to send packet-like messages from one blockchain with finality to another.

> Since the Polkadot relay-chain comes to finality by using the GRANDPA finality gadget, the IBC scheme proposed by Cosmos should be made to work with Polkadot (more on finality in the [section below](#finality)).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the Polkadot relay-chain comes to finality by using the GRANDPA finality gadget, the IBC scheme proposed by Cosmos should be able to work with Polkadot (more on finality in the [section below](#finality)).
```

Cosmos chains must keep the entire data for the chains they are validating, and for bridge chains will need to be also a light client of that chain. Cosmos has no plan to use erasure codes or fishermen at the base layer, but acknowledges that these could be implemented on top of IBC.

## Consensus

Polkadot uses a hybrid consensus composed of BABE, a block production mechanism and GRANDPA, a Byzantine finality gadget.

Cosmos uses Tendermint BFT consensus, which is closely inspired by Practical Byzantine Fault Tolerance (PBFT).

### Finality

Polkadot's GRANDPA finality gadget comes to finality on _chains of blocks_ rather than individual blocks. This is largely different from Cosmos, which comes to consensus on every block. In fact, Cosmos' Tendermint algorithm conflates the act of block production with the finality, which means that blocks can only be produced if they have been finalized. GRANDPA, instead is placed on top of the block production (BABE), and can finalize more than one block at once, making the overall consensus process run quicker.

### Liveness

> Polkadot has stronger liveness than Cosmos' Tendermint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Polkadot has stronger liveness than Cosmos' Tendermint, which prioritizes safety over liveness.
```

> Polkadot has stronger liveness than Cosmos' Tendermint, which prioritizes safety over liveness.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Polkadot's design has stronger liveness guarantees than Cosmos' Tendermint, which prioritizes the safety.
```

## Consensus

Polkadot uses a trifecta of the GRANDPA finality gadget, BABE block production, and Nominated Proof-of-Stake (NPoS) validator selection as its consensus framework.

Cosmos uses the [Tendermint][tendermint latest gossip] consensus algorithm with PoS validator selection. The Tendermint consensus algorithm is based on the practical Byzantine-Fault-Tolerant (PBFT) consensus with modifications to make it better suited to high-frequency gossip networks.  

For those brave souls who want to know more about how each consensus mechanism compares, we've broken it down into a few sections below.

### Finality

> Both the Polkadot relay chain and Cosmos hub will achieve finality under favorable network conditions with the assumption that > 2/3 of the validator set is available and honest. Once > 2/3 of the validator set has signed off on a block (or, in the case of GRANDPA a chain of blocks) those blocks are considered final and unable to be reverted. In comparison, Nakamoto consensus as used in most PoW blockchains can only guarantee probably finality at best.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both the Polkadot relay chain and Cosmos hub will achieve finality under favorable network conditions with the assumption that > 2/3 of the validator set is available and honest. Once > 2/3 of the validator set has signed off on a block (or, in the case of GRANDPA a chain of blocks) those blocks are considered final and unable to be reverted. In comparison, Nakamoto consensus as used in most PoW blockchains can only guarantee probable finality at best.
```

> The time-to-finality of both GRANDPA and Tendermint are limited by the bandwidth limit and latency on the network. As the number of validators increases, so will the number of messages that must get sent between them thereby slowing down the finality mechanism. Both Polkadot and Cosmos are interested in moving to as large of a validator set as possible without horrendously slowing down the network. In practical terms, Cosmos launch with 100 validators and Polkadot will launch with 50 - 100 and quickly scale up to around 1000.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The time-to-finality of both GRANDPA and Tendermint are limited by the bandwidth limit and latency on the network. As the number of validators increases, so will the number of messages that must get sent between them thereby slowing down the finality mechanism. Both Polkadot and Cosmos are interested in moving to as large of a validator set as possible without horrendously slowing down the network. In practical terms, Cosmos launched with 100 validators and Polkadot will launch with 50 - 100 and quickly scale up to around 1000.
```

One key difference between Tendermint and the consensus mechanism of Polkadot is how each protocol treats the act of block production. 

### Validity

> 

Reviewer 3: This section should emphasize how in Polkadot not every validator has to check all state transitions for pooled security. While current proposals from Tendermint make everyone run everyhting.
